[new product] GHC (Glasgow Haskell Compiler) (#6287)
captn3m0/endoflife.date: products/ghc.md

---

> title: GHC

Reviewer: Can we use the full title here? I understand GHC is the standard name, but I really want to make sure `haskell` is included in the title.

```suggestion
title: Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC)
```

iconSlug: haskell
category: lang

> tags: haskell-runtime

Reviewer: We can add this later once we have enough haskell projects. 

```suggestion
```

From our [contribution guide](https://endoflife.date/contribute):

```
# Remember that no tag is better than a useless tag. So do not introduce new tags when adding a product
# and use one of the tags listed on https://endoflife.date/tags/.
#
# Should you want to add a new tag, please open an issue first to discuss it with the team.
# Moreover, any new tag must be applied in a single PR to all products that should have it.
```

> permalink: /ghc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
permalink: /ghc
alternate_urls:
- /haskell
```

versionCommand: ghc --version
releasePolicyLink: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/GHC-status
changelogTemplate: https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/__LATEST__/docs/users_guide/__LATEST__-notes.html

> eoasColumn: Further releases planned
> eolColumn: Recommended for use

Reviewer: These two are very vague. We need something that aligns with the verbs that we use in the table ("ends in {duration}", "ended {duration} ago").

```suggestion
eoasColumn: Further releases planned
eolColumn: Recommended for use
```

We can give them better names and then explain the meanings in the description text.

Author: Vague indeed, but I'll ask a suggestion here :thinking:

First, I didn't want to depart too far from the [source table](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/GHC-status).

Then, to clarify my affiliation: I landed one small bugfix (and still waiting for it to get released), but overall the GHC team would be perfectly justified in calling me an outside contributor.

Then, I make sense of the two columns like so:
* **Further releases planned** — "Yes" means there're known work items (patches) to be batched in to the next minor release. "No" in this column doesn't mean EOL; it simply means there're no patches making their way into the next minor release. For whatever reasons.
* **Recommended for use** — "No" here essentially signals EOL: the version might be perfectly usable anyway, but bug-reports (if any) will be asked to retest on a newer version, and patches will not be considered.

Author: ... I also refreshed the release data. Perhaps this now gives a better idea about the former column:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0e82225f-96b0-46fa-b5dc-f8a902b789ac)

i.e. the **Further releases planned** — is merely a reflection of milestones where the project is moving toward. It's useful to see IMO, because these releases often take months to come out.

releaseDateColumn: true

identifiers:
- repology: ghc
- repology: haskell:ghc

auto:
  methods:
  - git: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc.git

>     regex: ^ghc-(?P<major>\d+)[.](?P<minor>\d+)[.](?P<patch>\d+)-release$

Reviewer: Regex looks good: https://regex101.com/r/aRqm9s/2

I'm guessing that the first stable release is always the `.1` patch release?

Author: Yes, that guess is correct — no `.0` versions get released — though the project uses terminology differently:
* `x.y.1` where `y` is even — is termed "major release" (may include removals & breaking changes),
* `x.y.z` where `y` is even and `z ≥ 2` — is termed "minor release" (bugfix and perf fixes only).

The `y odd` case is reserved for internal development use (compiler bootstrapping concerns), and aren't ever officially released for GA.

Author: ... having worded that — adding to explanatory text in-source

  latestReleaseDate: 2024-07-01
  eoas: false
  eol: false

- releaseCycle: "9.4"
  releaseDate: 2022-08-07
  latest: "9.4.8"
  latestReleaseDate: 2023-11-10
  eoas: true
  eol: false

- releaseCycle: "9.2"
  releaseDate: 2021-09-29
  latest: "9.2.8"
  latestReleaseDate: 2023-05-26
  eoas: true
  eol: false

- releaseCycle: "9.0"
  releaseDate: 2021-02-04
  latest: "9.0.2"
  latestReleaseDate: 2021-12-25
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.10"
  releaseDate: 2020-03-24
  latest: "8.10.7"
  latestReleaseDate: 2021-08-27
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.8"
  releaseDate: 2019-08-25
  latest: "8.8.4"
  latestReleaseDate: 2020-07-15
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.6"
  releaseDate: 2018-09-21
  latest: "8.6.5"
  latestReleaseDate: 2019-04-23
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.4"
  releaseDate: 2018-03-08
  latest: "8.4.4"
  latestReleaseDate: 2018-05-29
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.2"
  releaseDate: 2017-07-22
  latest: "8.2.2"
  latestReleaseDate: 2017-07-22
  eoas: true
  eol: true

- releaseCycle: "8.0"
  releaseDate: 2016-05-21
  latest: "8.0.2"
  latestReleaseDate: 2017-01-11
  eoas: true
  eol: true

---

> > [Haskell][] is a general-purpose, statically-typed, purely functional programming language with type inference and lazy evaluation.
> >
> > The [Glasgow Haskell Compiler][] (GHC) is a state-of-the-art optimizing compiler that emits native machine code for X86, AArch64, PowerPC, s390x, RiscV, Wasm architectures.
> >
> > It also includes an interactive REPL, several profilers, alternative codegen backends, and more; refer to [GHC User's Guide][].
> 
> [Haskell]: https://www.haskell.org/
> [Glasgow Haskell Compiler]: https://www.haskell.org/ghc/
> [GHC User's Guide]: https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/

Reviewer: Slightly more concise, we also prefer using [inline markdown links](https://github.com/endoflife-date/endoflife.date/wiki/Style-Guide#text)

```suggestion
> [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) is a general-purpose, statically-typed, purely functional programming language with type inference and lazy evaluation.
> The [Glasgow Haskell Compiler](https://www.haskell.org/ghc/) (GHC) is a state-of-the-art optimizing compiler for Haskell.
> It includes an interactive REPL, several profilers, alternative codegen backends, and supports x86, AArch64, PowerPC, s390x, RiscV, WASM architectures.
```

> Version support policy of GHC is not rigidly codified. As a general rule of thumb, **three most recent major release series** are actively supported by the compiler team. Ecosystem tools and libraries tend to support older versions than that.

Reviewer: This is confusing ("major release series" = 9.6,9.8.9.10 currently?) We shouldn't use the word `major` in that case, and just say releases

```suggestion
GHC's support policy is not well defined. Looking at past releases, three most recent releases are actively supported with bug and security fixes.
```

Author: :ok_hand: rewritten completely
